Standard ML of New Jersey
Version 0.36, 4 July 1989

This file describes the latest release of the Standard ML of New
Jersey compiler.  It is currently available under licensing from AT&T.

We are eager to receive your bug-reports, comments, and constructive
criticism.  The documentation is still in a primitive state, but your
comments on the installation instructions and manual would be
appreciated.  Any error message beginning with "Compiler bug"
definitely indicates a bug in the compiler and should be reported.
Please use an appropriate variation on the bug reporting form in the
file doc/bug.form and send comments and bug reports to:

   David MacQueen
   Room 2C-322
   AT&T Bell Laboratories
   Murray Hill, NJ 07974
   USA
   Phone: 201-582-7691
   Net: macqueen@research.att.com

Instructions for installing the compiler are in the file doc/INSTALL.

The main changes relative to version 0.33 are described in the file
doc/NEWS.36.  This is still a preliminary version -- it is fairly
complete and robust, but it has a number of cosmetic deficiencies,
missing features, and known bugs.

Format of the Distribution

The compiler is being distributed in two forms: (1) as a tar file on
tape containing a directory mldist, and (2) as a set of compressed tar
files accessible by arpanet ftp from the host research.att.com,
directory /u/mldist (contact Dave MacQueen for the login id and
password).

1. Tape distribution

Extracting the contents of the tape using tar -x yields a single directory
named mldist.  The contents of mldist are as follows (as printed by ls -F):

    README          mo.m68/         src/
    doc/            mo.vax/

README (this file) contains some general information on the current release.

The mo.vax and mo.m68 directories contain the Vax and Motorola MC68020 object
files for the compiler.

The src directory contains the source code of the compiler.

src/lib contains contributed software.  At the moment, this consists of
a lexical analizer generator (src/lib/lexgen) and a parser generator
(src/lib/mlyacc).

The doc directory contains a number of documentation files for installing and
using the compiler:

  INSTALL 	directions for installing the interactive Standard ML system.

  BATCHINSTALL	directions for using the interim batch system and bootstrapping
		the compiler.

  NEWS.xx	general information on changes and new features in version xx.

  help		hints for beginners on using the system.

  differences	a (partial) list of differences between our compiler and the
		Edinburgh compiler.

  weak-types	a very brief explanation of weak type variables.

  callcc	an explanation of the new callcc primitives.

  profiling	an explanation of how to use the profiling facilities.

  bugs		current list of known bugs (please check this before submitting
		bug reports).

  bug.form	suggested format for bug reports.

  refman/	TeX sources for an incomplete, provisional reference manual.

  examples/	A collection of example programs.  We would like to collect 
		additional examples contributed by users.  Please mail your
		example programs to macqueen@research.att.com.

  papers/	source files (troff -ms or TeX) for papers describing the compiler.


2. Ftp distribution

The ftp distribution contains the same material as the tape distribution,
made available as compressed tar files.

  doc.tar.Z    : the doc directory containing documentation
  src.tar.Z    : the src directory containing source code
  mo.m68.tar.Z : the mo.m68 directory of m68 object files
  mo.vax.tar.Z : the mo.vax directory of vax object files

NOTE: Ftp should be put into binary mode before transferring these files.

After the files are transferred they should be uncompressed using the
uncompress command and then extracted using tar into a directory called
mldist.  It may not be necessary to transfer all the files; if you do not
intend to run the compiler on a Vax, for instance, there is no need to ftp the
mo.vax.tar.Z .Z files.  The mo.cps.tar.Z is only necessary for
those who would like to try the cps style code generator.
